Title: 7 Software Development Tools to Learn For Your First Job

After working as a software developer full time over the last four years I have become familiar with the process of building software in a “Professional” setting.  I thought it might be helpful to go over seven of the most popular tools for building software that I use on a daily basis and you might not have heard of if you’re just starting out in your career.

1.  **Github/Gitlab** If you’re not brand new to coding then you’ve probably already heard of Git.  It’s a source control tool that allows developers to work, save, checkout multiple branches, and collaborate on code as a team.  I have found that using Git through the command line is the fastest, however I know great developers that use the Gui (graphical user interface).  The import thing is to understand the basics such as branching, pulling, pushing, and committing.  As you begin to gain experience you will also learn how to resolve merge conflicts and more powerful Git commands.
2.  **Jenkins** - Jenkins is a tool that I was not familiar with until my first full time job, that said it has proved to be extremely useful.  Jenkins allows you to build projects and automatically deploy them to your server.  Oftentimes projects are set up so that when you merge something into the ‘Develop’ branch this will automatically deploy a build to your development environment.  This practice is a part of continuous integration (CI/CD) which is part of the agile software development process.
3.  **JIRA** - Chances are if you’re working at a mid sized or large company building software they will likely be using JIRA.  JIRA is a commercial project management tool that is used to help track the progress of a development project.  Most modern development teams work in sprints (2-3 week cycles) and your tasks for that sprint will be created in JIRA.  Often as a junior developer tickets will be created and assigned to you however you should get comfortable creating tickets of your own as well as providing time estimates for the tickets.  The better documented a ticket is the faster you can get to work on it, quicker testing can be done and the code can get deployed.
4. **Development Environments**  - This is less of a tool and more of a concept, however, this is something you probably were not exposed to in college.  Most development shops set up multiple different ‘environments’ to run, test, & maintain their code.  While the naming of each environment can be different, the general idea is that you should not write code that goes straight to production.  Places that I have worked have had the following environments.                                                                                                                             
- *Lower(s)* - This is a development environment where developers can test their changes quickly. This is the first place your code will go after you are happy with the work you’ve completed locally (on your machine).  Sometimes QA will test in this environment although this is used as a playground for developers.  
- *Staging* - This should be a replica of your ‘Production’ environment.  The goal is for this to be the closest thing to ‘Production’ and a place to do one final test before releasing.  If there ever is an issue occurring on ‘Production’ that needs immediate testing a staging environment may be used.
- *Production* - This is where real users and clients are interacting with your code.  You should never push features or releases to production without thorough testing.  Oftentimes, releases to production will be managed by your project manager or team lead.

5. **Integrated Development Environment (IDE)** - If you are getting ready to start your first software development job you should be comfortable navigating an IDE.  IDE’s are designed to maximize programmer productivity.  For Web Development, I prefer to use Visual Studio Code for all frontend work and Eclipse if I am working on our backend.  For Mobile development you will likely use Android Studio and Xcode.  Which one you pick is your preference, however, the goal is to learn them inside and out since you will be spending a lot of your day using these tools.

6. **Terminal** - The terminal is a command line system that can allow you to quickly take control of your operating system and make changes.  You should get comfortable working inside the terminal as much as possible.  Opening my terminal is one of the first things I do every day as a software developer each morning.  You can pull down the latest code, connect to remote servers, or change file permissions to name a few.  It is important to have a basic understanding of the terminal and as you get into your career your knowledge of the terminal should grow exponentially.
7. **Music** -  I know this is not for everyone but I love to code with music in the background.  I have found that podcasts are typically too distracting and break my concentration however a good acoustic playlist or lofi beats always seems to get me in a productive mood. An important part of being a good software engineer is learning what gets you in the ‘zone’ and how to stay there for as much of the day as possible.

These are just seven of the many different tools and applications you will interact with as a software developer on a daily basis.  What you end up using the most will largely depend on your role and the day to day tasks for your position.  I hope you found this helpful and feel free to let me know if you feel I missed anything!

April 12th, 2021
