Title: Book Review: The Psychology of Money,  by Morgan Housel

‘The Psychology of Money’ is admittedly the first book I have read in some time and it was a great book to get back into the habit of reading.  It is a short, to the point, and easy read about personal finance that I think anyone can benefit from reading.  This book is broken out into twenty small chapters, each of which revolve around a common theme but could also be read independently. 

[Morgan Housel](http://www.morganhousel.com/) does a great job at taking complex ideas and explaining them in a way that your average middle schooler could understand.  He covers topics ranging from how the secret to investing is time, highlighted by his line “*None of the 2000 books written on Buffett's success are titled: This Guy Has Been Investing Consistently for Three Quarters of a Century.  Buffet’s skill is investing, but his secret is time*”.  Another chapter that stood out to me was his chapter on luck.  He points out how Bill Gates went to one of the only high schools that had a computer, roughly one in a million odds.  And during that time one of Bill Gates closest friends who was equally as talented with computers died in a rock climbing accident.. Roughly one in a million odds.  His point is not that luck is the reason that Bill Gates was successful in business, however, that luck does have an undeniable amount of influence on each of our lives.  This chapter stood out to me because I feel that I have been extremely blessed in the life I have gotten to live thus far, and while I do work hard I also have been lucky on numerous occasions.

Another takeaway that sticks with me was when Morgan Housel highlights a moment at a party hosted by a billionaire.  The hedge fund manager was clamoring to his pal Joseph Heller, that the host had made more money in a single day than Heller had earned from his widely popular novel Catch-22 over it’s whole history.  Heller’s response was perfection, “*Yes, but I have something he will never have . . . enough*”.  This is a very powerful statement in the modern world of social media, consumerism, and the pursuit of materialistic things that dominates the twenty-first century.  Morgan Housel goes on to highlight just how important it is to learn to have “enough”.  

The most important takeaway for me comes when Morgan Housel goes on to talk about what wealth really is.  As he puts it, “*The highest form of wealth is the ability to wake up every morning and say, I can do whatever I want today*”. To do what you want, when you want, with who you want, for as long as you want is priceless.  For me, this is something that I can work towards and is a much more wholesome goal than just seeing how big you can grow a bank account.

I would implore anyone who is looking for an easy & fun read about how our psychology plays a role on how we look at money to give this book a read.  It only took a few nights to get through the entire book and is a very wholesome read that everyone can take some lessons away from.  I would certainly recommend it. 
(https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/the-psychology-of-money-morgan-housel/1136394564)

October 21, 2021