*During my first internship, [AARP](https://www.aarp.org/) brought an employee from [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/) to speak about how to best use the platform to grow and build your career.  Here are some things I’ve learned since after 5+ years on LinkedIn.*

**Profile picture**: First impressions are important in both real life and on the internet.  Your profile picture on LinkedIn is your first impression.  Quality is top priority for this one - you want a clear image that will make you look professional.  If you do not currently have a good profile picture, try asking a friend with a good camera to take a photo.  If you want to go above and beyond you can also hire a professional to take the photo.

**About Me Section**: You want this to be short and to the point.  The goal here is to introduce yourself in one or two sentences (or even a phrase).  This is not the time to go in depth about yourself or your experience, you will have plenty of opportunity’s to do so below.  The key here is to convey your message as briefly and concisely as possible.

**Adding Relevant Experience**: It should come as no surprise that you want to highlight professional experience you have had in the past.  I find it extremely helpful to update this section every few months.  You do not want to have a great opportunity to arrive only to miss out because you couldn’t get your resume in order.  Taking time to continually update your work experience and accomplishments will help you significantly when you need to put a resume together fast.  It will also help you keep a timeline of what jobs you did when.

The other note to add in this section is that you want to list any promotions during your time at the company.  For example, you get hired at a company as a software engineer and two years later you get promoted to senior software engineer.  LinkedIn allows you to update your profile with your promotion.  This allows you to list all your accomplishments & responsibilities you complete in each position separately.  This is a great way to highlight your growth inside of your company - especially if you have spent a few years or more with the same company.

**Skills**: Add as many as you feel that you have!  I find this extremely helpful when you want to be found as well.  Recruiters will often search for candidates with certain “Skills” listed in their profile.  Your name will rise to the top of the search when you have a few of the fields in the search query.  It can also be helpful to include redundancies - this way you ensure you will come up in any of the popular search keywords.


**Respond to Recruiters**: I’ve listed this one last but it might be the most important on the list.  You want to add as many people as you can to your LinkedIn profile.  Wether you like it or not, LinkedIn is a social media and it behaves as such.  The more connections you have the more likely other people that have similar connections will begin noticing you.  It may seem tedious to respond to each message you get, even if you’re not in the market for a new job.  If you are happy with your current role, project, etc, simply thank the recruiter for taking the time to contact you.  Always follow up your response with a connection request!  You never know when this can come in handy in the future.  

From landing your dream job, finding new employees, and learning about what people in your industry are saying LinkedIn can be a tremendous resource for growing your career.  I highly recommend continuing to refine your profile as it has proved to be an extremely powerful tool to maximize your career potential.