Title: What I've Learned over the Past Year Working from Home - As a Software Engineer

	Fourteen months ago my life changed more drastically than any other time in my post-graduate life (2018).  I left Virginia on a Wednesday that week to attend my grandmother's funeral on Long Island not knowing that it would be the last time I left the office for over a year. After a weekend full of tears, celebration, and talk about what would come next my life suddenly changed drastically.  With the recent news of COVID-19, all work was to be done from home.  At the time I remember naively thinking that the virus would last for a few weeks, maybe a month but nothing more than that.  I had no idea that fourteen months later I would still be at home… working.


       Before I get into my takeaways from over a year of working from home I think it’s important to understand what my life looked like previously.  I work as a lead software engineer for a tech company based out of Washington, D.C.  At the time I was living in Shirlington, Virginia and would commute to my clients office (20 minute reverse commute) in the suburbs of Fairfax, Virginia.  My schedule consisted of four days in the office and I could choose one day a week to work from home.  I choose to have Friday’s from home.  Looking back I was lucky to be working for a company who supported working remotely.  Although it was expected to be in the office four days a week most of the year I would normally take a week or two in the summer to work remotely.  This kind of behavior was commonplace in my office.  All you needed was your manager's approval and written notice normally in the form of email.  It is also important to know that I work on a small team of eight people most of whom have been on the project for two plus years.  I would describe our team as a “Well Oiled Machine” because everyone knows what they need to accomplish.  Now that I have experience working on the same team in the office setting and remotely, it is the perfect time to highlight what I have learned about remote productivity, my productivity, benefits to working remotely and the drawbacks.


	Overall, **my productivity** while working from home has been positive.  Like many things in life there is a give & take.  In some areas of my work such as coding I do feel that productivity has improved.  In other areas such as team collaboration it has taken a step back.  The biggest productivity ‘hack’ while working remotely is to get on a consistent schedule.  Whether you are working from an office, your house, a coffee shop nearby, or the beach if you are too inconsistent you may have a hard time getting things done.  If you create good habits for yourself then you can be productive in any environment.  One of the big positives to working remotely has been my health.  I am now able to get plenty of sleep, workout, take my dog on walks throughout the day all while not sacrificing work or social obligations.  My personal productivity in that sense has gone way up.  Even though I had a relatively short commute (20 minutes by car each way) not commuting increases my quality of life in many areas.  One thing I struggled with early on is the idea of work never going away now that I work and live in the same location.  My best strategy for dealing with this has been at the end of my day I need to have a hard transition into another activity.  I am not able to just close my computer and walk over to the couch and start watching tv.  I find that if I do that my brain will often still be thinking about the problem I was trying to solve or if my computer just dinged and should I check that one last email.  I often do one of two things at the ‘End’ of my workday: go to the gym or take my dog to the dog park.  I find that doing either of these two activities gets me out of my house and takes my focus off of work.  When I return from the gym or the dog park my brain is no longer on work because work is done.  I have left and made a ‘commute’ of some sort.  This strategy has helped me immensely when it comes to disconnecting.  The other thing that helps me remain productive is that I have a great desk setup with multiple monitors, external keyboard, external mouse and a comfy office chair.  All of these things are must haves for me if I’m going to be working from somewhere for more than a week.  If you plan on working remotely in some capacity these are a must have in my opinion.  The takeaway over the past year of working remotely is that I can still do my job at a high standard, and be happier & healthier while doing so.


	Another interesting take away from the past year was my **team's productivity**.  This is something that will vary greatly depending on your situation.  What I can say is that for my team it has been business as usual.  We are able to work at the same pace and continue to be effective.  The hardest part about working remotely is that communication outside of your team is difficult.  In my situation, things like working with web admins or database administrators used to be as simple as walking over to their desk.  Now that same process involves placing tickets, sending emails, and phone calls to get the same things done.  The other issue with communicating outside of your team is that remotely, I am not as aware of the office politics such as who is working on a specific team or what other teams resources look like.  In the office, you have passing conversations with coworkers that can be as trivial as “Oh, I heard Bob from the web admin team is switching to the cloud team”.  These kinds of pop up conversations do not seem to happen anymore so people often find themselves sending emails to coworkers who are no longer doing that job anymore. Outside of external team communication my team was able to successfully change to remote working without losing productivity. 


	There are many **benefits to working remotely** and the more that I work from home the more I realize this to be true.  Some of the obvious benefits are no time spent commuting, making your office work for you, increased flexibility and spending more time with your pets.  I find that I live a much healthier lifestyle while working from home.  Because I am not spending an hour each day commuting that frees up an extra hour I can spend working out.  I also would occasionally work out during my lunch break while working in the office. However, when doing so it requires packing gym clothes, towels, shampoo, ect.  While working from home it is much simpler to head out for a run, come back, shower, and continue working.  I find my productivity is much higher when I take a break in the middle of the day to exercise as it clears my mind and sharpens my focus for the afternoon.  Another benefit to working remotely is you are not tied to one location.  If you want to spend a week at the beach but not burn through vacation time simply pack your laptop and bring your work with you.  Some of my friends have even been able to move to low cost of living areas and kept their high salaries allowing more money to be spent on other hobbies, savings, or investments.  The last benefit that is very important to many software developers is that if you are in a good remote work environment there can be a lot less distractions.  Coworkers talking on the phone, people walking to your desk to chat, and the constant noise of an office can be very distracting when trying to write code.  Working from home can change that because you do not have all the distractions you would have in your typical office.


	While working remotely certainly has its perks it is not without some **drawbacks** as well.  One big drawback is you don’t get to see or interact with your team members as much.  Unfortunately, messaging your coworker on slack is just not the same as having a face to face conversation.  I have found that working remotely can feel isolating at times since you're not having nearly the amount of interactions on a daily basis.  I was lucky enough to spend my time working remotely with my fianceeé and my dog, however I can imagine if you are living alone that loneliness would often creep in.  Another potential drawback to working from home can be that your workspace suffers.  Not everyone has a home office with no distractions and for those that do not work at home can be a nightmare.  We’ve all been on the conference line when a baby begins crying or the dog is barking.  Not being able to have a quiet place to work can make being a software engineer very difficult.  Another drawback is you also may need to move to have a better remote work situation.  At the start of the pandemic, I was living in a two bedroom two bathroom apartment with a roommate.  My office was also my bedroom and I just did not have enough space to work from long term.  A few months later when I moved in with my fiancée we knew we needed a dedicated office space.  Luckily it was not too much of an added cost, however, it is a luxury we would not have needed if we were still in the office.  The final major drawback to working remotely can be onboarding.  As more people are working remotely this is becoming easier however it can still be a pain point when compared to working in an office.    


	To summarize my thoughts, I think that remote work is here to stay in a much larger capacity moving forward.  With that being said I do not think that it works for everyone or every job.  It is also important to note that depending on what your office looks like vs. what your remote work looks like you may feel strongly one way or the other.  For myself, I wouldn’t mind getting back in the office on occasion and interacting with my team members in person.  That being said, it is hard to picture myself spending five days in an office again.  I would love to see increased flexibility in hybrid working scenarios where developers could spend 3 days a week at home and another two in the office.  I always enjoyed working from home in the past, and the last fourteen months showed me that I can work from home on a permanent basis and not lose productivity or my sanity.  The flexibility of working from anywhere, the healthier lifestyle, and not dealing with a commute are my main reasons for wanting to continue remote work in some capacity.   

June 03, 2021